Bryce sits by himself in the common room. The large windows open up on to the
growing construction site. Several weeks ago the rovers finished collecting
their survey data and Van Halen was able to make new building plans. As soon
as the plans were transmitted Vita and her team jumped into high gear. As a
result, the new homes, streets, and community buildings are coming up at an
incredible rate. While that should make Bryce happy, it has the opposite
effect. A ball of anxiety builds in the pit of his stomach. "What am I going
to do?" he says to himself. "I can't just sit here stressed. I need a
distraction." He swipes his phone on and types out a quick message to you. "Up
for a game of squash? Meet me at the gym in 10?".

You reply to the message and agree to meet him. The gym was completed last
week and it's been getting constant use. Finally, a place for everyone to
stretch their legs. One of the central attractions in the gym is the squash
court. Originally the team had planned on having a racquetball court installed
but they quickly realized that with the reduced Martian gravity, the
bounce-to-gravity ratio for racquetballs just made the game way too
difficult. Players could play a whole game without the ball ever touching the
ground. At that point someone suggested switching to squash. The game was
basically the same but a squash ball was so much less bouncy that it made up
for the gravity differences.

Bryce shows up just as you finish warming up. "Hey!" he says. "Hope you're up
for a good game." He jumps into the court and as soon as you're set he serves
the ball. After a few points of play it becomes clear that something is
bothering Bryce. He is hitting the ball so hard and playing so
aggresively. You're just about to ask what the problem is when you see
Director Goliss walk into the viewing area.

She points angrily at Bryce and signals him to come to her. "Oh great!" he
says. "We'll see how this goes." He opens the glass door to the court
enclosure and goes to the Director. It only takes a few moments of
conversation before Bryce starts yelling. "What am I supposed to do! You guys
dumped all this work on me. Twenty-five thousand! Do you have any idea how
long this is going to take?"

"I don't care!" the Director shouts back. "In less than 10 weeks we're going
to have those twenty-five thousand people floating around in space if we not
ready." She pokes a finger at his chest. "Get your job done!"

Bryce turns bright red then flings his squash racquet over the low court wall
and over your head. The racquet ricochets off the wall and would hit you
except that you quickly duck out of the way. "Fine" Bryce shouts into her
face. "I'll get my job done." He storms off through the gym doors.

The Director looks at you, as if noticing you for the first time, and then
turns to leave. She pauses, though, then returns back to you. She opens the
court door and walks up to you. "Sorry you had to witness that. I try to keep
things calm here." She does look apologetic but also non-compromising.

"What's the problem?" you ask.

"Well, since we had to redo the housing situation, all of the original living
assignments are wrong. Bryce, as Bon Jovi's HR representative, is required to
make new housing assignments. For some reason he's been dragging his feet. He
claims that he doesn't have any tools. They, Van Halen, gave him a single text
file with all of the families in it. I guess Bryce can't work with that
format."  She pauses for a thoughtful moment. "You have been very successful
in helping us in other software tasks, maybe you can help Bryce?"

You immediately start to think of all of the work you still have to do but
then the look on the Director's face convinces you. "Yeah, in the very least I
can go and talk to him. Maybe there is something I can do to help."  The
Director looks relieved. "Thanks!" she says. "Well, now onto the next fire."
She turns and exits the gym.

About an hour later, after you have changed and showered, you find Bryce in
the HR lab. He looks at you sheepishly when you step in. "Hey, sorry about
that explosion earlier. I just, well, I just can't handle the pressure right
now."

"So what's going on?" you ask him.

"Did the Director tell you the problem?" You nod in answer. "Well, if I just
had a way to look up families and their friends more quickly I think I could
make quick work of the assignments. Right now I just have to manually search
through this text file. It's impossible."

You look at the text file that contains all of the data and you realize how
you can help. "Ok, I can help here," you volunteer. "Send me this file and
what I'll do is make a program for you that let's you look people up and it
will automatically print out the family and friends. It will be very quick."

Bryce looks like a gigantic weight has been lifted off. "Really? You think you
can do that?"

"Hah. Piece of cake," you say. "Just give me a couple days and I'll have it
for you."

Bryce offers his fist for a fist bump. "Dude! That's awesome!"


