"So let me get this straight," Captain Larkson's voice boomed over the
communication channel. The directors from each of the colonies and the
captains of each of the colony ships were holding a briefing. "Our ships will
be in orbit and ready to deploy in less than thirty days and you're telling me
that you don't have food supplies!"

Director Goliss winced at the captain's harsh tone. While Larkson was the
captain of just one of the ships, his strong personality had lead him to
assume the de facto role of fleet commander -- even though there really wasn't
any such organization. The other captains did seem content to let him speak
for them.

"That is simply unacceptable. I've got over twenty thousand tired and restless
citizens on this ship and they are READY to get planetside." He paused and
made an effort to contain himself. "So just what have you been doing these
last few months?"

Director Surfolk, from Alabama started to speak up and Larkson cut him
off. "You know what? I don't want to hear it. As I see it, you don't have an
option. You get food production working or your going to be responsible for
thousands of dead colonists." With a rough hand gesture Larkson cut the
line. Meeting over.

Director Goliss sat back. What a jerk. But what a correct jerk. It was a
problem and they didn't have a solution. All of the planning and never ending
work for the last nine months. It was going to come down to a failure? Just
then her phone started ringing. She looked at the display. It was Steve
Perry-Thompson from Journey.

"Hello," she said. "That was interesting."

"Yeah, no kidding," the other director answered. "But I've got some good news
for you. Maybe."

"Go on"

"It's been on the news web that you've got a crack programmer over there on
Bon Jovi. Well, my food team recently had a breakthrough. I think that if you
get your programmer over here with my team, we can find a solution!"

Director Goliss sat forward in her chair. "Are you serious?"

"Yeah, I don't want to get our hopes up too high. But it's worth a shot. How
soon can you get here?"

"We'll be there in a few hours!"

"Awesome." Steve smiled over the video channel. "You know, here at Journey we
have a saying..." Before Goliss could stop him he continued. "Don't stop
believing!"

Goliss groaned and smiled. "Whatever. We'll see you soon." She hit the
disconnect button and immediately called you.

As soon as your phone rangs you recognize the director calling. A jolt of
nerves runs through your system but you answer anyway. "Hello?"

"Hello. I'm sure you're aware of our food problem?"

"Uhm, yeah. I think we all are."

"It turns out that Journey has an idea and they need a hot shot programmer to
help them. So I'm taking you. Meet me in the hanger in 10 minutes."

"Ok"

You hang up the phone, grab a small duffle bag of stuff and head to the
hanger. The director meets you there and you quickly board one of the colony
to colony transports. The ride is quick. The Journey colony is surprisingly a
lot like Bon Jovi.

Director Perry-Thompson meets you and Director Goliss as soon as you step off
the transport. "So glad you could make it. Let's head to food sciences right
away."

After an hour or two briefing it's clear what you needed to do. The food
scientists have designed a series of experiments to find the fastest growing
plant variations that require the least amount of water but provide the most
nutritional value. They explain to you that they need some software that would
simulate the experiments and then find the best results. As long as your
program could print out the experiment history, they could take it from there.

Everyone left the briefing with a glimmer of hope. This just might work and
you just might save the colonies.



