The drop ships started arriving earlier this morning. As fast as they could be
unloaded, they returned back up to the orbiting colony transports to pick up
another bunch of passengers. The director said it would take all day to get
all the colonists planetside. Even now, a few hours after the first ship had
arrived, there were already a few thousand new people bustling around Bon
Jovi. 

You walk into the area that has served as your cafeteria, hangout place, and
meeting room for the last several months. Most of the rest of the prep team is
there too. Everyone is watching the monitors setup in the landing bays. It is
satisfying to see the colonists step out of the transport and take their first
steps in their new home. The home that you helped to create.

Director Goliss enters, "Well everyone. We did it." She claps her hands in
silent applause. "There were times when I was really concerned but you guys
made it work." She looks at you and adds "Especially our software team. If it
wasn't for you, we would have failed. No doubt." There are appreciative nods
from around the room. Bryce flashes you a hang loose sign and smiles at you. 

Large bay windows look out over the complex of roads and habitats that form
the city part of Bon Jovi. Dozens of automated cars scuttle up and down the
roads delivering the families to thier assigned homes. Despite the lack of
an atmosphere, the phrase "excitement in the air" still applies. Sometimes you
can spot the passengers in the cars and everyone is looking around in awe,
smiling and laughing. You even notice that some cars are heading to the
recreation center. That's sure to be a popular spot.

The director makes her way around the room congratulating each person
individually then she starts to leave. As she gets to the door her phone rings
and she answers. The shock in her voice spreads through the room almost
instantly and everyone turns to her.

"What? You're kidding!" her eyes are wide and her face is pale. She listens to
the voice on the other end of the all while all of you watch her. The monitors
and bay windows are forgotten as you can tell there is something wrong. Very
wrong.

"We'll get right on it," she replies and slowly hangs up the phone. She looks
at all of you with a somber face. "The Boston colony ship just crashed. They
only got 25% of their passengers unloaded and then the ship just nose-dived
onto the surface." She can barely repeat the information. "They're going to
need all our help over there." She points at you and a few other of the
scientists and engineers. "Meet me at the hanger in 5 minutes!"

With that she turns and rushes out the door.



