Director Goliss looks out her room's large window at the Martian
landscape. Her room is the only one with a panoramic view of the building
site. Directorship does have some priviledges. But the responsibilities are
huge too. Large automated 'earth' mover and construction machines sit
silently, scattered over the relatively flat area just outside of the
preparation team's site. Up until this morning the robotic machines were
running around the clock building the colony streets and buildings in
preparation for the arrival of the full colony ships. She halted the machines
this morning. The new from Van Halen wasn't good. 

"What a waste of time," she says to herself. "Now we're going to have to start
over."  Her eyes drop to the tablet she is holding in her hands. She reviews
the message from last night. No change. Still bad news.

"Well, time to tell the troops." She leaves her quarters, heading towards the
common room.

You wait with the rest of the crew in the common room getting ready for the
Director's daily briefing. Conversation is lively and spirits are high. So far
the progress for all teams, except food production, has been great. You gather
from the discussions that many of the groups are ahead of schedule.

The group quiets down when the Director walks in. She strides towards the
front of the room. Paul, from Health, says something to her as she walks by
and she smiles a response back to him. Samantha, from Communications,
intercepts her. Something is bothering the wildly gesticulating communications
scientist but you can't tell what she's saying from where you're sitting. You
smile, it is Samantha. She's always high-strung. Maybe the baud rate back to
Earth dropped by a few bits per second. In the middle of a particularly large
hand gesture Director Goliss holds up her own hand to make Samantha stop. She
smiles at her but then steps past her to get up to where she can start the
meeting. Samantha plops back into her seat with a pout.

"Good morning, everyone," she starts. "I see that you are all, well almost
all," she glances towards Samantha, "are in a good mood. I can understand that
based on the reports I've been seeing. Many of you are ahead of schedule. If
you don't mind the pun I'll say that it's clear that 'Bon Jovi Rocks!'" A
smattering of groans and chuckles ripples through the room.

"First off I want to say Happy Birthday to our birthday boy today. Bryce,
Happy Birthday." The shaggy haired man from HR stands up waving at
everyone. He looks like a sterotypical 'surfer dude' from San Diego, his
hometown. "Yo dudes!" He flashes a sly smile around the room. "Hey. Free cake
today. It's on me!". 

"All of the food is free here," Robert calls from across the room. Bryce
shrugs and smiles, "Still doesn't change what I said. Free cake today, even if
it is recyled." You all laugh, even the Director, as Bryce sits back down.

"I also want to congratulate our software team on doing an excellent job on
the weather software." She looks at you and makes small applause. Various
utterances of "Good job" or "Way to go" come at you from others in the room.

"I'm afraid that's where the good news ends. Some of you may have noticed that
the building machines stopped this morning. Last night I received a message
from Van Halen and it's not good. When the colony sites were planned they were
based on projected weather patterns. The plans for buildings, roads, and
infrastructure were highly tuned to the remotely observed patterns. When Van
Halen started analysing the new weather data they discovered that the existing
construction plans were not going to work." Many of the team members gasp at
this news. 

Vita, from the construction team, immediately jumps up. "What are we going to
do? We need to have the buildings ready by the time the full colony ships
arrive!"

The Director waves Vita down with a calming gesture. "We have a plan. Van
Halen is going to need to select a new location for the colony buildings. They
are already working on it. Each 'city' is only 1 kilometer square so they
think that they can find a location that is still relatively close to our
current location. The only problem is that they don't have the geological data
to make sure that the ground is structurally sound."

You see a few people nodding in agreement.

"We've got a bunch of rovers and they all have the requisite equipment to do
the geological survey. Because of the critical timeline these are going to
need to be directly controlled by Van Halen. They want to be able to tell each
rover where to go and where to take samples. So this is where we need our
software team again." She looks at you. "We are going to need to reprogram the
rovers to perform the new task. I'll send you the details from Van Halen after
this meeting. Will you be able to work on this right away?" You see everyone
looking at you waiting for your response.

"Yes. Of course," you reply. "I'll start as soon as I get the details." You
are excited but you also feel a sense of responsibility.

Samantha pipes us, "What if the software isn't finished in time? What are we
going to do?" She asks the Director and then glares at you. Vita also looks in
your direction. "I have to have the building robots started again. Right away!
We have to know where to build."

"Well, first of all, I have high confidence in the team. But secondly, we have
to restart building in two weeks if we're going to have any chance at being
ready.  So if the software doesn't work out, we'll just have to restart
building with our best guesses. If it makes any difference, this is only
effecting three colonies. us, Boston, and Surivor. The rest of them are fine
as is."

The Director continues, "So I think that's everything for today. I'll need
each of the teams to start drawing up recovery plans for creating the new
site. We can meet individually to go over them." She pauses for a few
seconds. "Are there any questions?"

You notice that the team's mood is much more serious now than when the meeting
started. Vita mutters something about "two weeks". Everyone is looking a
little nervous. Samantha starts to raise her hand to ask a question but
changes her mind.

"Ok. Then that's the meeting. I'll talk to each of you later."

